At the Paris climate conference in 2015, the nations of the world agreed to limit global warming to 1.5 degrees. This is a good target - it’s a level of global warming that humans could adapt to relatively easily. But how feasible is it? The degree of global warming is determined primarily by how much carbon dioxide, CO2, we emit. If we want to limit that warming to 1.5 degrees, then it follows that there is a finite amount of CO2 that we are allowed to emit. We call this limit the “1.5 degrees carbon budget”. Going over that limit would risk significantly higher temperature increases.

So, what is our budget? How much CO2 have we emitted, and how much more are we allowed to emit? Well, we don’t know these numbers for sure, but the best estimates for the total budget are around 2,800 gigatonnes of CO2. That's a pretty hard number to get your head around so let me explain it with these Duplo blocks. Each one of these blocks represents 150 gigatonnes of CO2 emissions, so 2,800 gigatonnes in total. 

Now we’ve been burning fossil fuels for about 200 years now, so in fact we’ve already spent most of this emissions budget. If we want to know how much we have left, we simply subtract what we've already emitted. So, in the 19th century, when Europe and America began industrialising, we emitted half a block. In the 20th century, as industrialisation accelerated and spread around the world, we emitted 9 and a half blocks. And in the 21st century, we're only 20 years in and we've already emitted 5 blocks.

Leaving us with this, only three blocks worth of CO2 emissions. This is everything that we’re allowed to emit if we want to stay below 1.5 degrees of warming. At the current rate of emissions, we’ll have spent our entire budget within 15 years.

Well, I lied. Actually, we can go over budget, as long as we promise to pay it back later, by sucking carbon dioxide out of the air. It’s a little bit like an overdraft. The problem is, once you’ve emitted CO2 into the atmosphere, it’s extremely difficult to get it back. Removing just one block's worth of emissions from the atmosphere is estimated to cost around 12 trillion pounds. And you thought NatWest's overdraft fees were bad.

By now, you can probably guess what my opinion is on the feasibility of the 1.5 degrees target. There’s no denying the cold logic of numbers. Do I think we should aim for it anyway? Absolutely. As they say in climate science, the best time to reduce emissions is 20 years ago - the second best time is now.
